---
title: 'Performance of polygenic risk scores for cancer prediction in a racially diverse academic biobank: Methods part 2'
date: 2022-04-23
permalink: /posts/2022/04/blog-post-10/
tags:
  - Penn Medicine Biobank
  - Genetics in Medicine
  - Cancer risk
  - GWAS
  - Polygenic risk score
  - PRS
  - Racial differences
---

This blog post is Part 2 of outlining the materials and methods used in our lab's most recent work on generating polygenic risk scores (PRSs). This article is entitled "Performance of polygenic risk scores for cancer prediction in a racially diverse academic biobank". It was published in October 2021 and led by Dr. Louise Wang and Heena Desai. 

My sources for this blog post are the article, available [here on Elsevier](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1098360021053673) and [here on PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34906489/), as well as a text file from Heena that explained the study process in greater detail.

Phenotyping of PMBB participants
------

We evaluated 19,935 individuals in PMBB with available genotyping data who had passed genotyping quality control and had at least 1 physician encounter, who together had 4.9 million health care encounters. Cancer cases were identified from the EHR using International Classification of Diseases (ICD)-9 or ICD-10 billing codes. To determine the number of instances of ICD-9/10 codes needed to identify cancer cases, manual chart review was performed for 2365 individuals with at least 1 ICD-9/10 billing code for prostate cancer. The positive predictive value of 1 ICD-9/10 prostate cancer billing code was 94% (Supplemental Figure 1). On the basis of this, we used a similar strategy to identify individuals with bladder, breast, colorectal, endometrial, esophageal, glioma, lung, melanoma, oral cavity and pharynx, ovarian, pancreatic, prostate, renal, testicular, and thyroid cancers (Supplemental Table 1, Supplemental Figure 2). Cases comprised both prevalent and incident cases. In total, there were 18 to 457 and 6 to 421 cancer cases in individuals of European and African genetic ancestry, respectively (Table 1). Controls were defined as individuals with no ICD-9/10 codes for invasive cancer, benign, in situ, or secondary neoplasms (Supplemental Figure 2). The African genetic ancestry data set contained 8711 individuals and the European genetic ancestry data set contained 9788 individuals. Of these, 8673 individuals of African genetic ancestry and 9759 individuals of European genetic ancestry had complete genotype, phenotype, and covariate data.

SNV selection
------

Summary statistics were obtained using the most recent study and largest GWAS available in the GWAS catalog19 for each of the 15 cancers in this study (Supplemental Table 2). All of the available GWAS were conducted on European ancestry individuals. SNVs were chosen on the basis of a P value threshold of P < 1 × 10–6. SNVs were pruned for linkage disequilibrium (LD) on the basis of pairwise genotypic correlation at r2 = 0.1 (Supplemental Table 3) using the European 1000 Genome database reference panel in PLINK 1.9.20 In addition, we also evaluated the performance of previously established PRS for breast (Breast-313)21 and prostate cancer22 in our biobank. For the previously validated prostate cancer PRS, we calculated PRS using weights from individuals of European (Prostate-EUR) and African (Prostate-AFR) genetic ancestry separately.

PRS generation and statistical analysis
------

PRS for each individual was calculated using PLINK 1.9 by summing the LD-pruned SNV variants and weighing their corresponding effect sizes using the odds ratios (ORs) or beta values reported in the original GWAS. We standardized each cancer PRS to a mean of 0 and SD of 1 and used logistic regression to test for the association between cancer PRS and cancer phenotype and to compare the top versus bottom quintiles of polygenic risk, controlling for age, sex, and the first 10 within-ancestry PCs as covariates. We performed a primary analysis for cancers with >100 cases and included a secondary analysis of the remaining cancer types. Area under the curve (AUC) for primary phenotype was determined using the package pROC.23 All statistical analyses were performed using R 4.0.3.
