---
title: 'Performance of polygenic risk scores for cancer prediction in a racially diverse academic biobank: Methods'
date: 2022-04-17
permalink: /posts/2022/04/blog-post-6/
tags:
  - Penn Medicine Biobank
  - Genetics in Medicine
  - Cancer risk
  - GWAS
  - Polygenic risk score
  - PRS
  - Racial differences
---

This blog post will outline the materials and methods used in our lab's most recent work on generating polygenic risk scores (PRS). This article is entitled "Performance of polygenic risk scores for cancer prediction in a racially diverse academic biobank. It was published in October 2021 and led by Dr. Louise Wang and Henna Desai. 

The purpose of the study was to determine whether PRSs can improve on current risk calculators for predicting cancer occurence, particularly in non-white populations.

This blog post will not explain the entire study. Instead, I will outline the methods used. My sources for this blog post are the article, available [here on Elsevier](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1098360021053673) and [here on PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34906489/), as well as a text file from Heena explaining the study algorithm.

Penn Medicine Biobank cohort and genotyping
------

Genotyping quality control and genetic ancestry determination
------

Genetic information used was the "exome" vcf files, which I presume were taken from the "Exome" directory and included the "pVCF" subdirectory. I believe this was the subfile called "All Variants".

Note on this file, which is called "All Variants"
1. Genetic information was converted from .vcf to .bed using Plink
2. 
3. 

- Sex mismatch errors
- Poor sample call rate
- Palindromic variants
- Variants with a poor call rate
- Impution
- Eigenstrat principal components analysis to determine genetically informed ancestry

Next, there algorithm involved:
- Division of population by African or European ancestry
- 

Phenotyping of PMBB participants
------

SNV selection
------

PRS generation and statistical analysis
------
