---
title: 'Performance of polygenic risk scores for cancer prediction in a racially diverse academic biobank: Methods'
date: 2022-04-17
permalink: /posts/2022/04/blog-post-7/
tags:
  - Penn Medicine Biobank
  - Genetics in Medicine
  - Cancer risk
  - GWAS
  - Polygenic risk score
  - PRS
  - Racial differences
---

This blog post will outline the materials and methods used in our lab's most recent work on generating polygenic risk scores (PRS). This article is entitled "Performance of polygenic risk scores for cancer prediction in a racially diverse academic biobank. It was published in October 2021 and led by Dr. Louise Wang and Henna Desai. 

The purpose of the study was to determine whether PRSs can improve on current risk calculators for predicting cancer occurence, particularly in non-white populations.

This blog post will not explain the entire study. Instead, I will outline the methods used. My sources for this blog post are the article, available [here on Elsevier](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1098360021053673) and [here on PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34906489/), as well as a text file from Heena that explained the study process in greater detail.

Penn Medicine Biobank cohort and genotyping
------
Briefly, at the time of the study, there were:
- 20,079 patients
- There were 3 batches of different DNA array-based genotyping using Illumina's "Infinium Global Screening Array (GSA)"
  - 5,676 used Illumina GSA V1 chip
  - 2,972 used Illumina GSA V2 chip at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP)
  - 16,940 use Illumina V2 chip at Regeneron Genetics center

Genotyping quality control and genetic ancestry determination
------
Genetic information used was the "exome" vcf files, which I presume were taken from the "Exome" directory and included the "pVCF" subdirectory. I believe this was the subfile called "All Variants".

**Different degrees of quality control:**

It's important to note that these exome vcf files have already undergone several steps in quality control. In fact, there are different versions of them available. They are called:
- **NF** which stands for non-filtered
- **GL** which stands for Goldilocks
- **All variants** which contains the above two filetypes converted into .bed files and other different filetypes using Plink

**Goldilocks quality control:**

1. For SNP variants with "depth of coverage" (DP) < 7, this is modified to "No-call"
2. For INDEL variants with "depth of coverage" (DP) <10, this is modified to "No-call"
3. Allele Balance (AB) filters, which detect 2 scenerios of heterozygous genotype calls, and then change a sample to "No-call"

    a. SNP variant site requires at least one sample to carry an alternate Allele Balance (AB) >= 15%
    b. INDEL variant sites require at least one sample to carry an alternate Allele Balance (AB) >= 20%

At this point, I believe the study used the Goldilocks file, which was converted to .bed using Plink for further processing. 

Note: With this .vcf/.bed file, I wasn't sure how each variant is linked to a patient. When I examine further, I see that the .vcf files in the Goldilocks dataset are ordered by chromosome number, and then inside the file there are PMBB id numbers. This might explain how later, we can correlate each patient phenotypic information with their genetic variants from the exome file.

- E.g for chromosome 1, there is a .vcf file called "Chromosome 1"
- Then, for the CHROM # in the .vcf file, there's a PMBB ID, such as PMBB9408077252215

**Further quality control measures:**
- Sex mismatch errors
- Poor sample call rate
- Palindromic variants
- Variants with a poor call rate
- Impution
- Eigenstrat principal components analysis to determine genetically informed ancestry

Next, there algorithm involved:
- Division of population by African or European ancestry
- 

Phenotyping of PMBB participants
------

SNV selection
------

PRS generation and statistical analysis
------
